# Rock-hosted biofilms: mineral selectivity drives hotspots for intraterrestrial life
## ***Casar, C. P., Kruger, B. R., Osburn, M. R.***

**ABSTRACT**
	The continental deep subsurface is likely the largest reservoir of biofilm biomass on Earth, but the role of mineral selectivity in regulating biofilm biomass and diversity here is unclear. Minerals can locally enhance biofilm biomass, producing hotspots for intraterrestrial life. These mineral-hosted biofilm communities can be starkly different from the corresponding fluid-hosted communities, which may be driven by metabolic affinity for mineral substrates by members of the biofilms. Metabolic transformations of minerals by subsurface biofilms may occur widely with the potential to significantly impact subsurface biogeochemical cycles. However, this level of impact depends upon the amount of biofilm biomass and its relationship to host rock mineralogy, estimates that are currently loosely constrained to nonexistent. Here, we use in situ cultivation of biofilms on native rocks and coupled microscopy/spectroscopy to constrain mineral selectivity by biofilms in a deep continental subsurface setting: the Deep Mine Microbial Observatory (DeMMO). We find that mineral distributions, particularly those putatively metabolized by microbes,  indeed drive biofilm distribution at DeMMO, and that bioleaching of pyrite may be a volumetrically important process here influencing fluid geochemistry. Given the ubiquity of iron and sulfur-bearing minerals at this site and globally and the amount of biomass they can support, we posit that rock-hosted biofilms likely contribute significantly to subsurface biogeochemical cycles. As more data becomes available, future efforts to estimate biomass in the continental subsurface should incorporate host rock mineralogy.


### Run code

All scripts can be run from the `batch.R` file which includes variables that can be modified. 